=== Document Text ===

Dr. Alex Kalynychenko 
Department of Geography, Geomatics and Environment
University of Toronto Mississauga
March 11, 2025Lecture 9. Spatial Analysis IIGeographic Information 
Processing
GGR 321 H5S  (DH 2060)

Lecture 9 Outline
•Announcements (5 min ): Q2, Q3, A1&2
•Textbooks and other resources
•Brief overview of Lecture 8 Spatial Analysis I (10-15 min ):
Analysis Based on Location ,Analysis Based on Distance
•Spatial Analysis I & II. Demo (ESRI, 2023 )
•Break (1.55 pm –2 pm)
•Spatial Analysis II (cont.)
•Q&A (5 -10 min)
Spatial Analysis I & II
Answers scientific and practical geospatial questions:
Where ? What ? When ?      and later     Why ? How ?
Allows to:
•Solve complex location -oriented problems
•Explore and understand your data from a geographic perspective
•Determine relationships , detect and quantify patterns , assess trends
•Make predictions and decisions
•Address important questions and decisions that are beyond the scope of 
simple visual analysis
•Combine information from many sources and derive new information by 
applying a set of spatial operators
Source: after ESRI 2024
A schematic model of the geodesign process, developed by Carl Steinitz to capture the 
various stages used in his practical applications of geodesign principles
Source: after Longley et al. (2015)Spatial Analysis I & II

Spatial Analysis. ArcGIS Pro extensions
•The extensions are specially designed to:
•3D Analyst —Analyze and create 3D GIS data and perform 3D surface operations using 
rasters , TINs, terrains, and LAS datasets (lidar)
•Business Analyst —Analyze market trends , including customer and competitor analysis, site 
evaluation, and territory planning
•Geostatistical Analyst —Analyze and predict the values associated with spatial or 
spatiotemporal phenomena
•Image Analyst —Interpret and use imagery , perform feature extraction and measurement, 
and perform classification and object detection using machine learning
•Network Analyst —Measure distances and travel times along a network to find a route 
between multiple locations, create drive -time buffers or service areas, and find the best 
locations for facilities to serve a set of locations
•Spatial Analyst —Find the most suitable locations , calculate distance and determine optimal 
paths by incorporating the cost of travel , analyze and interpolate surfaces, calculate density, 
conduct hydrologic analysis , perform statistical analysis, and perform various raster -based 
mathematical operations
•Known vs unknown limitations (Aristotle)Source: after ESRI 2024
Spatial Analysis I & II. ESRI Demo
•Spatial Analysis ESRI Webinar, April 2023 
https://mediaspace.esri.com/media/t/1_g3iqfu51
Source:  ESRI, 2023

Machine learning and AI
Machine learning refers to a set of data -driven algorithms and 
techniques that automate the prediction, classification, and clustering 
of data
Deep learning is an important subset of machine learning techniques 
that uses artificial neural networks to learn from data
Source: after ESRI 2024
Capabilities and Tools using machine learning 
and deep learning
•The Mapping Clusters toolset and Modeling Spatial Relationships toolset in 
the Spatial Statistics toolbox
•The Time Series Forecasting toolset in the Space Time Pattern Mining 
toolbox
•Feature, tabular, and text analysis tools in the GeoAI toolbox
•The Multidimensional Analysis toolset and Deep Learning toolset in 
theImage Analyst toolbox
•The Point Cloud toolset in the 3D Analyst toolbox
•The interactive deep learning -based object detection tool
Source: after ESRI 2024
Big data analytics
ArcGIS Pro includes tools that can transform large amounts of spatial 
data into manageable information 
The GeoAnalytics Desktop toolbox provides a parallel processing 
framework for analysis on a desktop machine using Spark 
The Raster Analysis toolbox contains tools for performing 
computationally intensive raster analysis on image services and other 
portal items.                           
Source: after ESRI 2024
Modeling and scripting
•Understanding the geoprocessing framework is helpful in writing 
effective Python scripts
•Python and ModelBuilder are often used in tandem, so a good 
knowledge of ModelBuilder is recommended to get the most out of 
Python scripting
Source: after Zandbergen (2024)
The Purpose of Area -Based Analyses
Measurement of area
•One way in which humans simplify geography of the Earth’s infinite 
complexity is by ascribing characteristics to entire areas rather than to 
individual points.
The algorithm forcalculation ofthe area ofa
polygon given thecoordinates ofthepolygon’s
vertices .The polygon consists ofthe three
black arrows, plus theblue arrow forming the
fourth side.Trapezia are dropped from each
edge tothe x-axis, and their areas are
calculated as(difference inx)times (average of
y).
Source: after Longley et al. (2015)

Redistricting following the 2010 
U.S. census, coupled with a new 
opposition to gerrymandering in 
California, transformed the old 
23rd Congressional District 
(yellow) into a new, more 
compact 24th District (outlined 
in red)The Purpose of Area -Based Analyses
Measurement of shape
One way to bias the outcome of an election in the United States is to draw (or 
gerrymander ) district boundaries to include a majority of people likely to vote 
for a particular party
Source: after Longley et al. (2015)

Centrality
Centers
•There are several numerical measures of central tendency including 
mean, median, and mode
•Centers are the two -dimensional equivalent of the mean 
•The centroid or mean center is the most convenient way of 
summarizing the locations of a set of points 
oFound by taking the weighted average of the x and y coordinates
Source: after Longley et al. (2015)
The mean centre of the U.S. population, determined from the results of the 2010 
census. Also shown is the median centre, such that half of the population is to the 
north and half to the south, half to the east and half to the west
(Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, public domain )
Source: after Longley et al. (2015)Centrality

Seven points are distributed along a line, at coordinates 1, 3, 
5, 11, 12, 18, and 22. The curve shows the sum of distances 
squared from these points, and how it is minimized at the 
mean [(1+3+5+11+12+18+22)/7 = 10.3]
Source: after Longley et al. (2015)Centrality

The mean is also the balance point, the point about which 
the distribution would balance if it were modeled as a set of 
equal weights on a weightless, rigid rod
Source: after Longley et al. (2015)Centrality

The centroid or mean center replicates the balance -point 
property in two dimensions —the point about which the two -
dimensional pattern would balance if it were transferred to a 
weightless, rigid plane and suspended
Source: after Longley et al. (2015)Centrality

Dispersion
•The measure of choice for numbers with interval or ratio properties is the 
standard deviation, or the square root of the mean squared difference from 
the mean
oStandard deviation and variance are considered more appropriate 
measures of dispersion than the range (difference between the highest 
and lowest numbers) because as averages they are less sensitive to the 
specific values of the extremes.
oRMSE is a similar measure of dispersion
•A simple measure of dispersion in two dimensions is the mean distance from 
the centroidCentrality
Source: after Longley et al. (2015)

Analysis of Surfaces
•Slope and aspect  
•Modeling travel on a surface 
•Computing watersheds and channels  
•Computing visibility 
The DEM and inferred flow 
directions using the queen’s case 
move set
Computing watersheds and channels:
hydrologic analysis of a sample DEM
Accumulated flows in each cell 
and eroded channels based on a 
threshold flow of 4 units
Source: after Longley et al. (2015)

The DEM and inferred flow 
directions using the queen’s case 
move set
Computing watersheds and channels:
hydrologic analysis of a sample DEM
Source: after Longley et al. (2015 ), https://www.travelassociates.com/


•Analysis of the Orange County DEM 
predicts the river channels shown in 
red
•The Santa Ana River appears to flow 
out of the gorge shown in the upper 
right, and then far to the west before 
emptying into the Pacific near Seal 
Beach 
•In reality, it turns south and empties 
near Newport Beach in the bottom 
center
Source: after Longley et al. (2015)Computing watersheds and channels:
hydrologic analysis of a sample DEM
A schematic model of the geodesign process, developed by Carl Steinitz to capture the 
various stages used in his practical applications of geodesign principles
Source: after Longley et al. (2015)Spatial Analysis I & II

Location -allocation problems which involve where to locate and how to 
allocate demand to central facilities include
•The p-median problem which seeks optimum locations for any 
number pof central facilities such that the sum of the distances 
between each weight and the nearest facility is minimized.
•The coverage problem which seeks to minimize the furthest 
distance traveledPoint locations
Source: after Longley et al. (2015)
(A)the problem is solved in 
continuous space, with straight -
line travel, for a warehouse to 
serve the 12 largest U.S. cities. In 
continuous space there is an 
infinite number of possible 
locations for the site
(B)a similar problem is solved at the 
scale of a city neighborhood on a 
network, where Hakimi’s theorem 
states that only junctions (nodes) 
in the network and places where 
there is weight need to be 
considered, making the problem 
much simpler, but where travel 
must follow the street networkSearch for the best locations for a 
central facility to serve dispersed 
customers
Source: after Longley et al. (2015)Point locations (cont.)
Routing problems
Routing and scheduling involves decisions about the optimum tracks followed by 
vehicles
•The shortest -path problem finds the path through the network between a 
defined origin and destination that minimizes distance or some other measure 
based on distance
•The traveling -salesman problem (TSP) is to select the best tour out of all 
possible orderings of places to visit, in order to minimize the distance (or other 
measure) traveled
•The orienteering problem is similar to TSP but the objective is to maximize the 
rewards associated with visiting a selection of the stops while minimizing the 
total distance traveled
Source: after Longley et al. (2015)
•Screenshot of the system used 
by drivers for Sears to 
schedule and navigate a day’s 
workload
Routing problems
Source: after Longley et al. (2015)
Hypothesis testing
•Much work in statistics is inferential which uses 
information obtained from samples to make general 
conclusions about a larger population, on the 
assumption that the sample came from that population
•Randomization tests which simulate a large number 
of random arrangements of the data offer a good 
alternative
•A randomly placed sample of points used to examine 
the relationship between vegetation cover class 
(delimited by the boundaries shown) and elevation 
(whiter areas are higher), in an area north of Santa 
Barbara
Source: after Longley et al. (2015)
Conclusions
•Spatial Analysis is a powerful set of methods that can be applied to spatial 
data to add value to them , to reveal patterns and anomalies that are not 
immediately obvious, to find solution s for complex spatial problems and 
support decision -making
•Spatial Analysis allows to combine spatial information from various 
sources and derive new information by applying a set of spatial operators
•Selection of appropriate geospatial tools and extensions for Spatial Analysis 
in ArcGIS Pro environment depends on the scope of the problem/project, 
available data and resources, level of expertise and follows the key 
geodesign principles
Spatial Analysis I & II. Which route is yours?
Thank you!
Reminder: Quiz 4 will be administered via 
Quercus next week, covering materials of Week 
9&10 Spatial Analysis I&II and recommended 
readings ,so please plan your time accordingly
Next lab 3 is on Thursday, March 13, 2025
